---
layout: default 
title: ZEP0001 
parent: draft ZEPs 
nav_order: 1
---

# ZEP 1 - Zarr specification version 3

Authors:

* Alistair Miles ([@alimanfoo](https://github.com/alimanfoo>)), Wellcome Sanger
  Institute

* Jonathan Striebel ([@jstriebel](https://github.com/jstriebel)), Scalable
  Minds

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2022-05-23


## Abstract

This ZEP proposes a new major version of the core specification which defines
how to store and retrieve Zarr data. The ZEP also proposes a new framework for
modularising specifications of codecs, storage systems and extensions.



## Motivation and Scope

@@TODO

This section describes the need for the proposed change. It should describe the
existing problem, who it affects, what it is trying to solve, and why. This
section should explicitly address the scope of and key requirements for the
proposed change.

## Usage and Impact

@@TODO

This section describes how users of Zarr will use the new features, spec changes
or a new process described in this ZEP. It should be comprised mainly of code
examples that wouldnâ€™t be possible without acceptance and implementation of
this ZEP, as well as the impact the proposed changes would have on the
ecosystem. This section should be written from the perspective of the users of
Zarr, and the benefit it will provide them; as such, it should include
implementation details only if necessary to explain the functionality.

## Backward Compatibility

@@TODO

This section describes how the ZEP breaks backward compatibility.

Its purpose is to provide a high-level  summary to users who are not interested
in detailed technical discussion, but may have opinions around, e.g., usage and
impact.

## Detailed description

@@TODO

This section should provide a detailed description of the proposed change. It
should include examples of how the new functionality would be used, intended
use-cases and pseudo-code illustrating its use.

## Related Work

@@TODO

This section should list relevant and/or similar technologies, possibly in other
libraries. It does not need to be comprehensive, just list the major examples
of prior and relevant art.

## Implementation

@@TODO

This section lists the major steps required to implement the ZEP. Where
possible, it should be noted where one step is dependent on another, and which
steps may be optionally omitted. Where it makes sense, each step should include
a link to related pull requests as the implementation progresses.

Any pull requests or development branches containing work on this ZEP be linked
to from here. (A ZEP does not need to be implemented in a single pull request
if it makes sense to implement it in discrete phases).

## Alternatives

@@TODO

If there were any alternative solutions to solving the same problem, they should
be discussed here, along with a justification for the chosen approach.

## Discussion

@@TODO

This section should have links related to any discussion regarding the ZEP. It
could be GitHub issues and/or discussions. (The links to discussions in past if
any, goes in this section.)


## Storage transformers

@@TODO describe introduction of storage transformers, and how these can be used
to support more efficient data access via packing of multiple encoded chunks
into a single storage object via the sharding extension.


## Related Work

@@TODO

This section should list relevant and/or similar technologies, possibly in other
libraries. It does not need to be comprehensive, just list the major examples
of prior and relevant art.


## Implementation

@@TODO zarrita

@@TODO zarr v3 support in xtensor

This section lists the major steps required to implement the ZEP. Where
possible, it should be noted where one step is dependent on another, and which
steps may be optionally omitted. Where it makes sense, each step should include
a link to related pull requests as the implementation progresses.

Any pull requests or development branches containing work on this ZEP be linked
to from here. (A ZEP does not need to be implemented in a single pull request
if it makes sense to implement it in discrete phases).


## Alternatives

@@TODO

If there were any alternative solutions to solving the same problem, they should
be discussed here, along with a justification for the chosen approach.


## Discussion

@@TODO

This section should have links related to any discussion regarding the ZEP. It
could be GitHub issues and/or discussions. (The links to discussions in past if
any, goes in this section.)


## References and Footnotes

* <a name="ref-ZARR2SPEC"></a>
  [ZARR2SPEC] - https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable/spec/v2.html


## License

<p xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/"> <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"> <img
src="https://licensebuttons.net/p/zero/1.0/80x15.png" style="border-style:
none;" alt="CC0" /> </a> <br /> To the extent possible under law, <a
rel="dct:publisher" href="https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps"> <span
property="dct:title">the authors</span></a> have waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to <span property="dct:title">ZEP 1</span>. </p>
